                                     README

ltcltk

   A package that provides bindings for Lua to Tcl and the Tk toolkit.

   Author: Gunnar Zötl <gz@tset.de>, 2010, 2011.
   Released under MIT/X11 license. See file LICENSE for details.

   This has been developed using Tcl/Tk 8.4 and 8.5 on Linux and MacOS X.
   It should also compile on Windows, the only non ISO-C function used is
   snprintf().

   ltcl is the binding to the Tcl interpreter. It allows to access Tcl
   variables from Lua, function calls from Lua to Tcl and also from Tcl to
   Lua, plus the ability to define Tcl functions in Lua. See README_ltcl
   for details.

   ltk is a simple pure-Lua binding to the Tk toolkit that uses ltcl to
   access the Tk functionality through a Tcl interpreter. All standard Tk
   functions and widgets from Tk 8.4 and Tk 8.5 are supported, with the
   ability to provide Lua functions where standard Tk expects Tcl
   functions or scripts. A few Tcl functions that seemed useful in the
   context of ltk are also provided. See README_ltk for details.

   A few examples are provided for illustration purposes. They reside in
   the folder samples. The ones whose names start with tk are ported from
   Tk 8.5 examples.

Installing

   You need to have the Tcl development files installed. On MacOS these
   come with Xcode, on Linux you will have to install the appropriate
   package. If you have both Tcl/Tk 8.4 and 8.5 installed on your system,
   you may have to change the rockspec file to link to the appropriate
   version. Normally calling
   sudo luarocks install ltcltk

   or when you have an unpacked source folder,
   sudo luarocks make

   should do the right thing.

Known Issues

   On MacOS X the ltkimage.lua sample does not terminate. The exit
   function is not called, I don't know why. That is the main reason why
   we're not at version 1.0.

Versions

   0.9-2

          + bugfixes related to functions as arguments to widget commands
            not having worked in some circumstances
          + a bugfix related to <Destroy> events, where event handlers
            might have been called multiple times
          + addition of the "tag" widget command for the text widget
          + a slightly modified ltk.addtkwidget() function
          + Also there is a bit of new sample code.

          Thanks to Alex Bradbury for bug reports and the suggestion of
          the additional argument to ltk.addtkwidget().

   0.9-1
          Initial release
